+++

title = "Notes on IRQL and Deferred Procedure Calls"
date = 2020-03-16 00:05:28 -0500

+++

## Interrupt Request Level

- every hardware interrupt is associated with a priority: _Interrupt Request Level (IRQL)_
- The HAL determines a hardware interrupts IRQL
- Code with highest IRQL gets executed first
- Process:
  - IRQL triggers CPU to save its context in the current threads kernel stack and raise its IRQL to that of the request, and then executes the corresponding Interrupt Service Routine
- Important IRQLs:
  - `PASSIVE LEVEL`: normal IRQL. Thread scheduling normal
  - `APC_LEVEL`: for specific kernel APCs. Thread scheduling normal
  - `DISPATCH_LEVEL`: this CPU cannot be woken by thread scheduler, no access to page memory allowed, cannot wait on kernel objects
  - Device IRQL: Like `DISPATCH_LEVEL` but with range of levels (3-11 on x64).
  - `HIGH_LEVEL`: Highest level, masks all other interrupts. value is 15 on x64
- If IRQL 2 or higher:
  - Must access non-paged pool. Access to paged or user-supplied buffers is unsafe
  - Crash occurs if a dispatcher kernel object is awaited (unless timeout is 0)
- Thread scheduler runs at IRQL 2. Anything higher than that has no ability to switch contexts
- IRQL can only be changed in kernel mode. Use `KeRaiseIrql` and `KeLowerIrql`
- Always verify that the IRQL has been raised after attempting to raise it

## Deferred Procedure Calls
- Cause a PC to wait while it is servicing a request for data from a peripheral device.
- Steps:
  - Data from hardware device is requested by the OS
  - Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) issued
  - If device cannot immediately service the request, DPC is issued
  - Everything else wiats while the request for data is fulfilled.
- DPCs are associated with a system-defined DPC object
- One DPC object is supplied for each device object
- Drivers can have more than one DPC object
- DPC structure is undocumented. [see the definition for KDPC](https://github.com/joshfinley/ntoskrnl/blob/master/Include/ntosdef.h)

## References

- https://leanpub.com/windowskernelprogramming
- https://helpdesk.flexradio.com/hc/en-us/articles/202118398-What-are-DPCs-and-why-do-they-matter-